
---
layout: post
title:  "Hiatus"
date:   2010-08-04 13:08:42 +1030
categories: tex
---

<p>Those of you who have been following my activity for the last few years will recall my frequent comments &ldquo;the thesis is almost done&rdquo; — for the last several years. Well, has it been? All that time?</p>

<p>The past year has been a combination of too many mini-projects for me: code and papers for my PhD; fontspec and unicode-math in XeLaTeX and LuaLaTeX; the Herries Press collection of packages; the continued development of LaTeX3; teaching and lecturing; and more besides. My responsibilities seem to be compounding rather than settling down. My actual thesis has seen far less attention than it should have.</p>

<blockquote>
  <p>&ldquo;Why, I feel all thin, sort of <em>stretched</em>, if you know what I mean: like butter that has been scraped over too much bread. That can&rsquo;t be right. I need a change, or something.&rdquo;</p>
</blockquote>

<p>I wish it didn&rsquo;t have to come to this, but as of today I&rsquo;m not going to be able to devote any significant time to the LaTeX world until my thesis is complete. I&rsquo;ll still be answering support emails when I can, and I&rsquo;ll release bug fixes for urgent problems, but don&rsquo;t expect to hear too much from me for the next six months.</p>

<p>I&rsquo;m sorry to let down those with whom I&rsquo;m working fairly closely on a couple of different things. Rest assured I&rsquo;ll be back and able to spend some real time on everything once I&rsquo;ve got the monkey off my back.</p>
