---
layout: post
title:  "Forces between cylindrical magnets"
date:   2011-03-11 13:08:42 +1030
categories: magnets
---

<p>Deriving an equation to calculate the forces between cylindrical magnets is harder than for cuboid magnets (for which a <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TMAG.1984.1063554">closed form solution</a> was first published in 1984).</p><p>Most recently, <a href="10.1109/TMAG.2010.2049026">Ravaud et al. published</a> (2010) an closed form expression for the force between coaxial magnetic cylinders, for which I've currently a paper in publication with a much simpler equation. You can download my code for implementing this in my <a href="https://github.com/wspr/magcode">repository of magnet code</a>; the Matlab example is ‘examples/ravaud-cylmag.m’ and the Mathematica example has extension ‘.nb’ with the same name.</p><p>The force equation for coaxial magnets contains elliptic integrals, and when analysing the system for eccentric displacements in the radial direction the integral becomes, as far as I know, not possible to solve tractably. I'm aware of two different approaches for calculating the forces for these cases. The first is by Nagaraj in a <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10402008808981815">somewhat-elusive paper</a> from 1988 who simplifies the necessary integrals until only a double-integral that can be evaluated numerically. (A numerical evaluation of a nicely-behaved integral is typically around an order of magnitude slower than if a closed form solution is known.)</p><p>A more recent analysis of eccentric magnetic cylinder forces was <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmmm.2009.07.030">published in 2009</a> by Vokoun et al., and to be honest their approach is a little alien to me; I haven't looked into their maths very much and I don't know if the implementation would be harder and/or more efficient than the approach used by Nagaraj.</p><p>Implementations of these latter two papers would be very useful for us at the moment but I don't have time to do it myself right now; I have some honours students who might step up to the plate. If so, I'll add their code to the magcode repository; a common theme with all this code is that a reference implementation saves people so much time when they need to use the theory publicised by these authors.</p><p>The DOIs for the papers mentioned above are:</p><ul><li>Akoun &amp; Yonnet 1984: 10.1109/TMAG.1984.1063554</li><li>Ravaud 2010: 10.1109/TMAG.2010.2049026</li><li>Nagaraj 1988: 10.1080/10402008808981815</li><li>Vokoun 2009: 10.1016/j.jmmm.2009.07.030</li></ul>
