---
layout: post
title:  "Trends in recent years for TeX mailing lists"
date:   2011-02-15 13:08:42 +1030
categories: tex
---

![](mailing-list-trends.png)

[Manuel Pégourié-Gonnard](http://weblog.elzevir.fr/) asked whether I’d
looked at the number of posts to the [texhax mailing
list](http://tug.org/mailman/listinfo/texhax) when I posted last night
about traffic to comp.text.tex. I had considered it, but I ran out of
time, then, to scrape the data from the online archives. See above for
the newly-gleaned information.

Interesting enough (and perhaps gratifying) to see that texhax traffic
has remained constant over the last eight years; the mailing list itself
dates back to 1986 but only recent years were available for my primitive
data-analysis skills.

I’ve also included the data for the [TeX on Mac OS
X](http://mactex-wiki.tug.org/wiki/index.php?title=TeX_on_Mac_OS_X_mailing_list)
mailing list, and there the results are a little more noisy. (Note even
three months with greater than 1000 posts per month!) The drop-off in
2007 is interesting, because it correlates with [the
switch](http://www.tug.org/twg/mactex/award/2007/gerben/aboutgwtex.html)
from Gerben Wierda’s ‘gwTeX’ distribution to TeX Live as the basis for
MacTeX. Gerben’s work in the 2000s was fantastic, and TeX on the Mac
would not have thrived as it did without him—but the move to a
centralised TeX Live seems to have been the right choice at that time.
(Gerben provided the initial support for TeX Live on the Mac, so his
work lives on.)

Since 2007 the data for the Mac OS X TeX mailing list is pretty much
constant, tracking slightly above texhax in terms of number of posts per
month.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I also mentioned yesterday that I think a fair chunk of the traffic to
comp.text.tex may have moved to tex.stackexchange.com. The ‘tex.se’ Q&A
site officially launched three months ago after a three month beta
period. At that time, the site had on average 12.7 questions per day
with 2.4 answers being given per question (numbers from
[area51](http://area51.stackexchange.com/proposals/2148/tex-latex-and-friends)).

Three months later, being now, the site
[receives](http://stackexchange.com/sites?expand=true) 24 questions per
day, and the answer ratio is slightly lower at 2.1 answers per question.

In total, the site currently contains some 3400 questions and 7200
answers: the equivalent of around 1700 ‘posts’ per month (I don’t have
exactly numbers to the day for how long it’s been operating). And this
rate seems to be increasing, although two data-points is hardly a trend.

Compared to the traffic for comp.text.tex and the mailing lists I’ve
shown above, I don’t think you can argue that tex.se is now playing a
very important role for TeX support.

